Puppy 101 - The 101 on Pre-Puppy Shopping
by /u/CallMeMrsSlender, mod for puppy101
Basic Puppy Supplies
Containment
A crate that matches your puppy's expected adult size and preferably comes with a divider

Something to cover the crate to make it seem more like a den

Portable wire playpen - makes a safe place for the puppy, and can also be used on the deck or in the yard or driveway

Baby gates to block the puppy into allowed rooms

Travel crate, car harness or buckle-in leash for travelling

Water and Food Bowls
Shallow bowls for young pups and short-nosed dogs; deep dishes for long-nosed adult dogs; raised dishes for tall dogs

Metal or porcelain bowls are best, because they are durable and easy to clean. Plastic can get goughed and scratched, hold old food smells and harbor bacteria.

Leashes
4-6 foot nylon, leather, tough fabric or biothane

No retractable leashes - they make loose leash training very difficult, and are hazardous to puppy and owner if the puppy runs full speed to the end of the leash

20-30 foot lightweight, flat training line for recall training or playtime - also called a lunge line

Collar and Harness
Collar can be buckle or clip (buckle is more durable, clip is faster especially in case of emergency removal) and made of nylon, leather or fabric - consider one with reflective qualities if possible

Harness - should be worn only on walks or while riding under restraint in a car. Remove the harness after the walk and during playtime at the park. Here is some good advice on possible detrimental physical effects of improper fit/use as well as some reviews. Also, it's best to let the puppy gradually get used to having the harness put on - use lots of treats!

Identification tag for each collar/harness with puppy's name, your address and cell phone number. Or use removable tag holders to switch tag set between different collars.

Bedding
Old towels, sheets and fleece blankets are perfectly suited for this purpose. Cheap, easy to wash, no big deal if they get ruined.

A real dog bed is great for some puppies, but others chew their beds, get overheated on a plush bed, or just don't like them. Stuffed beds are also more difficult to wash. It's probably better to stick to a less-expensive version at first.

Enzymatic Stain Cleaner
This product is sold in most pet stores, Target and home improvement stores

The enzymes will destroy the scent of pet accidents much better than any other product, thereby discouraging the puppy from having another accident or re-marking in that same spot

Be sure to follow label instructions. Do not use any other product on the stain prior to the enzymatic cleaner.

Potty Pads (if you choose to use them)
Be sure you understand the downfalls of using potty pads! It can be very difficult to train the puppy later than it's not acceptable to potty inside. For more info on housetraining, check out our wiki article
Food and Treats
Food appropriate for your puppy
Ask to be provided with several days' worth of the food the puppy is currently eating. Or get the brand and type in advance so you can have it already at home. Changes in diet should be made gradually over at least three to four days to avoid GI upset.

When choosing the food you will feed for the first year, do your research. Ask your vet, ask your breeder, ask friends that have healthy dogs of similar size and breed, ask the puppy owners here.

Choose a food that is labeled specifically for puppies, since most experts believe that this will provide the optimal balance of calories, vitamins and minerals. Strongly consider Large Breed Puppy food for those puppies, as well as Corgis, Basset Hounds and similar breeds that are large-boned but short in stature.

You don't have to choose the most expensive food out there. But do choose a food that your puppy will thrive on, with good growth rates, a healthy coat, bright eyes and good energy.

Treats for fun
Silly biscuits, crunchy treats, puppy treats for whenever you feel like handing them out!
Treats for training - choose one soft and one crunchy style until you see what your puppy prefers
Soft small treats, soft treat sticks that can be cut up, or dog food rolls cut into small pieces

Crunchy small treats

Remember that all treats don't need to come from the pet store. Bits of fruit like strawberries, bananas, blueberries or apple; bits of veggies like carrots, peas, green beans or zucchini; bits of unseasoned leftover dinner meats like chicken, beef or salmon; bits of string cheese - all can be used as training treats.

Kongs
Buy a few appropriately-sized Kongs for stuffing and freezing

Sterilized, empty marrow bones can also be used for stuffing and freezing

Check out our Kongs and Chews article for stuffing ideas!

Chews
Check out our Kongs and Chews article for more information on chews
Grooming Supplies
Fleas, Ticks, Heartworms
Flea and Tick Prevention - Use this year-round unless you live a climate that is very cold in winter. Oral and topical medications are recommended over collars, which can give dangerously high insecticide doses to puppies and are generally ineffective anyway. Oral and topical medications can also have side effects, so ask your vet for product recommendations. Also ask whether heartworm prevention is required in your area. Be sure to closely follow instructions for dosage and application, as well as recommendations for when to bathe before or after topical applications.

Flea Comb - useful when checking for fleas and for combing back long hair around puppy's eyes

Dental care
Enzymatic pet toothpaste

Finger brush, dog-safe toothbrush, old rag or disposable gauze pads for applying toothpaste

Nail care
Guillotine-style clippers or a dremel for trimming nails

Quik-Stop or other anticoagulant powder in case of bleeding

Brushes
Short-haired dogs - curry brush, bristle brush

Long-haired dogs - wire/slicker brush, undercoat rake, metal straight comb

Extreme shedders with thick coats - deshedding brush like Furminator (use with care), Zoom Groom, heavy-duty slicker brush or deshedding gloves. Most puppies will not require these types of brushes until their adult coats come in.

Shampoo and conditioner (or detangler)
There are many choices so pick something gentle that is made for pets and smells good to you.

Using a Zoom Groom at bathtime can make it an awesome spa massage for the puppy and cut down on loose hair.

Dry Shampoo or Leave-In Shampoo spray - great option for a quick wipe-down on a muddy day.

Other
Good quality poop bags - trust us, you don't want those suckers to split open.... And a box of latex gloves can be handy too, for accident clean-up in the house or when having to pick up really runny stools

Wet Wipes - unscented and made for pets. Great for a quick wipe-down, especially for foot pads and bums.

Paw wax or lotion - keeps paws soft and helps out during hot summers and cold winters.

Grooming clipper if you are interested in doing this at home

First Aid Kit - yeah, we know, it's not a grooming item. But do you have one?

Toys! (All toys have potential dangers associated with them, and owner supervision is key.)
Rope toys - do not leave rope toys with an unattended puppy
Great for tug of war and enticing a new puppy to walk alongside the owner.

Watch out for loose strings that can be sheared off and ingested.

Balls - do not leave balls with an unattended puppy
Rubber, Kong brand, Chuck-It brand - be sure the ball is small enough that your puppy can carry it but large enough that it doesn't fit all the way in his mouth, or it can be a choking hazard.

Tennis balls - use only under close supervision. Do not allow the puppy to chew on the ball. This compresses it and makes it a much greater choking hazard because it can then re-inflate in the back of the puppy's mouth and block air flow. Also, the fuzz on the outside of tennis balls is very abrasive to teeth over time.

Stuffed Toys
Safe for puppies who do not rip them up and eat the outside, stuffing or squeaker. Use your judgement on proper supervision level required.
Chew and Tug Toys
Kongs, GoughNuts, JollyPets and similar - these are heavy-duty dense rubber and safe to leave with most puppies when unattended

Avoid thin rubber toys because pieces are very easily chewed off and swallowed.

Frisbees may be fun for some puppies. Choose a rubber variety rather than hard plastic. Do not throw the frisbee in a way that encourages jumping in the air - that's not good for puppy joints.

Nylabones and other chew toys are discussed in our Kongs and Chews article

Puzzle Toys
Can be a lifesaver when you need to keep puppy busy while you focus on you.

Start off with easy puzzle toys that dispense food at a rapid rate, in order to keep puppy interested. You may have to help at first.

For YOU, to make your life easier - ideas from our puppy owners
A supply of frozen meals, phone number to food delivery service, and easy slowcooker recipes to make dinner prep easy when you are tired in those first few weeks

Hit the grocery store, gas up the car, clean the house and get the laundry done before puppy's arrival

A dehydrator can be handy for making inexpensive training treats at home

Do your research on (and visit) puppy classes, puppy socialization places and daycare before puppy arrives. Get signed up for classes right away, since many fill quickly.

Have a gift card on hand to your favorite cafe or ice cream parlor so you can give yourself a break

Pull out some old clothes that you can wear when playing on the floor with your puppy. Puppies bite and clothes get holes as a result.

Have appropriate rain gear for walks on wet days. Puppies have to be walked regardless.

Rainboots are great for rainy days AND for walking through damp fields or muddy trails.

A TRUSTED vet. Don't be afraid to check out several places. Walk in and ask about their puppy package. Does it smell and look clean? Were you greeted quickly and in a friendly, professional way? Read reviews but know that, as in most things, people are more likely to review when unhappy. Ask your friends where they go. Call a local veterinary specialty hospital, say you are new in town and need to find a good vet nearby. They may or may not be willing to give out a few names, but they WON'T give out the name of any vet they don't believe is good. Follow your instincts when you take your puppy for the first visit. Did the staff seem happy to see him? Did the vet treat him gently and examine him thoroughly? Were all your concerns taken seriously and answered? If it doesn't feel right, find another vet.



Your Pre-Puppy Shopping List (Dogs too!)
So you've read all of the previous lesson and decided you really can get a dog. What do you need to buy for its debut?

It's your best bet when bringing home a puppy or dog to assume they are not potty trained. Why? In a new environment, everybody is unsure about the rules, and you need to cover all of your bases.

The basics that a pup will need: Water and food bowl Collar (preferably snap release adjustable nylon for a puppy, buckle nylon or leather for adult dog) 4-6 foot nylon or leather leash (NOT retractable) Toys acceptable for their age (puppy specific toys, easier to take the dog with you to the store and have THEM pick their toys) Food acceptable for their age (puppy food) Bedding (lambskin or soft blanket for a crate, or an actual bed from the pet store) Name tag (you can get one at your local pet store, put your phone number on it and the dog's name, or whatever you like) Treats (for training, soft treats are best) Grooming supplies (toothpaste, a flea comb, nail clippers and brushes that fits your breed's coat type, puppy shampoo or adult dog shampoo depending on their age) Potty pads (just in case) Enzymatic stain cleaners (the best ones to buy are at the pet store because they eliminate the stain as well as the odor undetectable by humans)

These are the first things you need to purchase when you're getting a pup.

Bowls: if you're getting a very young puppy, do not get a deep bowl. Puppies can fall in and drown. Get a shallow dish that can't be flipped over, or you'll have water all over the floor. If you're getting a very tall or large adult dog (mastiffs, great danes, rottweilers, etc), your water and food bowls should be placed in a stand that will raise the height of the bowls. This prevents the dog from choking on its food.

Why don't I like retractable leashes? It allows your pup to get into a dangerous situation and you have no control over the outcome. A 4-6 foot leash will allow you to train your dog to walk closely to you and allow you greater control of the dog in case something happens.

Taking your puppy to the pet store to pick its own toys is a fun experience for everyone. You can take things off the shelf and squeak them, let the pup smell them, and chase them around the aisle. This way you are not going to waste money on toys that your dog won't even touch (trust me, I learned that lesson long ago). Just make sure that they are age appropriate toys. If you pick a Kong, make sure it's the puppy kong, not an adult Kong. The material gives a bit more so it feels really good for the puppy to sink its teeth into it when they are teething. DO NOT pick toys that resemble items in your home like squeaky feet or shoes. Why? When your puppy chomps down on your foot and you go EEEEEK! you're the newest toy. And you can't get mad when your puppy goes into your closet and chews up your favorite loafers, either. Not his fault.

If you are planning on crate training your puppy, you need to buy a crate that is appropriate for his size AT THE TIME YOU GET HIM. This does mean as he grows bigger, you'll have to buy a bigger crate. Why not just buy the largest crate you can find? Because puppies will go potty on one side, and sleep on the other. With a crate just big enough for them to sit, stand, and turn around in, they won't want to dirty their sleeping quarters and will alert you when it's time to go potty elsewhere. Within that crate you will need to put something soft like a towel or a blanket or a lambskin (which is my favorite, though they are harder to find nowadays).

Okay, so that's all for this lesson. In the next lesson, we will be covering the actual act of bringing home your new puppy and how to get the basic eating, pottying, and sleeping habits under control.

See you then!

Here are the great comments when this was a University of Reddit post: kereezy: As for the crate, it's not a bad idea to buy an appropriately sized wire crate with a partition that can be moved/removed so that the crate grows with the puppy. Throw a blanket over the crate so the pup gets that "den" feeling, and that way you don't have to buy 20 crates. These wire crates are collapsible too, so they travel well.

In addition to the crate, something you might want to think about is an exercise pen. It's like having 8 wire baby gates hooked together, that you can make into any shape. If you're crate training and want your pup to have some extra room to roam around, this might be a good idea for you. :)

Also, if you're getting a very young pup (one that hasn't had a full set of puppy vaccinations) you might want to wait on the fun trip to the pet store to pick out a toy- hundreds of other pets have walked there, and you don't know what your little one might pick up. Parvo is ~80% fatal. Scary stuff. :(

Campbell363: Another reason for not using retractable leashes: Dogs have to pull on the leash for them to get to the end of the leash, thus teaching them to pull while walking on a leash.

And as far as potty pads go, when I was a trainer I would always suggest against them if you eventually want to teach them to go potty outside. Potty pads give off the scent that attracts dogs to that spot to go potty. So it might slow down the potty training because you are confusing your dog by letting them go potty inside, when you want to train them to go outside. My response:Absolutely, but unfortunately most people don't keep a close enough eye on the pup to take them out every chance they need it, so if they are determined to have a puppy at a very young age and are prone to anger, I'd rather have it take longer to train the pup to go outside than have someone shove the pup's face in it and risk eliminating in other rooms.


Formatted List of Supplies:
Water and food bowl

Collar (preferably snap release adjustable nylon for a puppy, buckle nylon or leather for adult dog)

4-6 foot nylon or leather leash (NOT retractable)

Toys acceptable for their age (puppy specific toys, easier to take the dog with you to the store and have THEM pick their toys)

Food acceptable for their age (puppy food)

Bedding (lambskin or soft blanket for a crate, or an actual bed from the pet store)

Name tag (you can get one at your local pet store, put your phone number on it and the dog's name, or whatever you like)

Treats (for training, soft treats are best)

Potty pads (just in case)

Enzymatic stain cleaners (the best ones to buy are at the pet store because they eliminate the stain as well as the odor undetectable by humans)

Grooming supplies

Toothpaste

Flea comb

Nail clippers

Brushes that fits your breed's coat type

Puppy shampoo or adult dog shampoo depending on their age